[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
MORAN CERF: Thank you.
All right.
So I'll spend the next 30
minutes, a little bit more,
talking to you about
my work in the last 12
years, a neuroscientist.
And I'll leave some
room afterwards
both for questions about how it
translates to business, which
is somewhat what I do
right now, but also
to what I call the
inspiration part where
I try to also tell you
why I think it's not
just a theoretical idea
that should be done by labs,
but also something that
would be in your life
in the coming years.
OK.
So maybe I should start
with something else.
I tend to speak very fast,
especially when I get excited.
So I need someone from the front
to raise your hand every time
it becomes too fast,
you think, for yourself
or for the audience.
So everyone gets to
raise their hand,
but you maybe
channel everyone's--
OK.
So the point of my talk--
I'm going to give it to
you in the beginning,
and I'm going to
repeat it at the end--
is to suggest that our
understanding of the brain
has evolved in
the last 10 years.
And what it brought to
us is some new thinking
about our role in
controlling our behavior.
So whereas we used to think
of the brain as the equivalent
of who we are-- as
us equals our brain--
we now have more
understanding of the fact
that maybe in your brain there
is more than one entity, if you
want, living with you and
governing your thoughts.
And part of what we
call our consciousness
or us is a mechanism
that comes and takes
all the historical
events in your memory
and weaves them
into a narrative.
And what it does mostly
is looking at the past
and trying to kind of come up
with a story that is coherent
that can explain this behavior.
And the reason it's important
and not just a theoretical idea
is because once we
accepted this idea,
we can actually go into your
memory and change things.
And you will create a new
narrative for yourself.
And you will never question this
understanding of who you are.
And you will just
walk in your day
with different understandings
of who you are.
So what we call
consciousness isn't just
how we tell our story, isn't
just what we call the truth,
isn't experience of the
reality that we go through.
It's also a way for us to
make sense of the world.
And in the context of both
psychology and business,
when we try to talk
about changing behavior,
many times we try to
teach people and give them
more information and think
that if we just give them
the right information,
everything
is going to be different.
They're going to understand
and behave differently.
And now, we come up with
a totally different idea
of how we do that.
We just change something in
your brain that leads you
to just wake up with
a different behavior
and just carry that
forward and tell yourself
a story that it was
always what you wanted.
So in many ways, this is not
a trivial thing to understand.
That these three pounds
that sit between our ears
actually govern who we are
and everything that we do.
They actually allow us to
change someone's behavior
by just changing small
indicators in there.
And whereas I spend a lot
of my time thinking about
that, it's still hard
for me to accept what I'm
going to end this talk with.
Which is that if you learn
to cope with your brain
as something that drives things
without you actually having
a full understanding
of why they happen,
but kind of explained
differently,
you can actually
change your behavior.
The best analogy I found
was one that I experienced
when I was a little kid that
allowed me to kind of think
about the world differently.
So when I was a kid, I grew up
in Israel in the early '80s.
And at that time, computers
were extremely inexpensive,
and games were very scarce.
So if you wanted to
play computer games,
you would go to an arcade store
where they had this big machine
that you can play games.
And I was a big fan of
this game that some of you
may be still familiar with it.
You play this little
Italian plumber below.
And you're trying
to save the princess
that this vicious
gorilla kidnapped.
And the gorilla
throws barrels at you
that you try to dodge
while climbing up.
And I went to the arcade
store and played this game
for roughly 30 seconds,
doing a pretty good job.
So I managed to get
to the second level
and kind of dodge a few barrels.
When suddenly two words
appeared on the screen
that changed my view of control.
And the two words
were insert coin.
And what it meant was that I
wasn't playing the game at all.
I was watching a video, a demo
of the game playing itself.
And I was just
seeing it happening.
But in my mind,
I was in control.
So the movie was showing
how the game goes.
And the character was
moving up and down
and jumping above
barrels and so on.
And I was actually the
joystick, but there
was no connection between
the joystick and the movie.
But in my mind, there was.
I was sure I'm in control.
Now, granted, the intentions
for the movie and my intentions
were aligned.
So it made sense for
me to try to go up
when the character moved up,
to go left when it went left,
to press the jump button.
Granted, there probably were
times where I tried to move
right and it moved left, or
tried to jump and it didn't.
But because for the most
part the movie aligned
with my intentions, I was able
to tell myself a story that
says that I'm in control.
And only when I was confronted
with reality in a way
that I couldn't really
resist any more,
I said, OK, I guess I'm
just watching a movie.
And the reason I'm
telling you this story
is because this, in my mind, is
the best analogy we have right
now to how the brain and
our consciousness work.
Things happen to us.
Behaviors occur.
And we, after the fact,
come back and own them,
claim that we had
agency, and try
to tell a story that made
us do those things as
if we wanted them.
And this is hard to accept.
I'm going to repeat that one
more time towards the end.
But that is the message of what
we are understanding right now
about the brain, which is, for
the most part, things happen.
And we can explain them
if we look at their brain.
But we don't necessarily
explain them well if we ask you.
So if we ask you
to tell us a story,
you will come up with a story.
If I ask you why you
did what you did,
you will always have an answer.
But more and more,
we see that there
is misalignment between
the answer that you give
and what our brain tells us and
sometimes even how you actually
will explain your intentions.
So this is a theoretical
idea, however,
there are by now a few ways
for us to actually test that.
So in one of the studies that
we're running right now that's
based on a study
that was done here
in New York a few years
ago, we essentially
are able to show people
the gap between the moment
that your brain made a
choice and the moment you
come to explain this choice.
And we can show you that those
are not necessarily aligned.
And in fact, we
can change things,
and you will still
defend your choice.
So what we do in this
study, we essentially
bring people to the lab to
make very basic choices that
mean nothing to them.
But they are continuous
and repeated.
So the idea is if you're
a subject in the study,
we bring you to the lab.
You will sit down.
And the guy in the back who
is running the experiment
will pull two cards.
And he would ask you
to make a choice.
And the choice is--
which of the two people you see
here you find more attractive,
the guy on the left or
the guy on the right?
So lets play it with you.
Who do you find more
attractive-- the guy
on the left, the
guy on the right?
The guy on the left.
Why?
AUDIENCE: He's smiling.
MORAN CERF: Smiling.
So this is one trial
out of about 100 trials
in this experiment.
Let's say you are the subject.
We show you two cards.
You make a choice.
We give you the card you choose.
You hold it in your
hand, and you say,
I like this guy
because he's smiling.
Now, you don't know any of them.
They mean nothing to you.
It's many, many choices.
It's all kind of arbitrary,
but you make them,
and you always have an answer.
So if you did this, we'd
pull a panel of cards,
again, let you make a decision.
Give the card,
experience, so on.
So this is the experiment we
all expected, very simple.
But there is
actually a twist here
that makes it more interesting.
Because the guy in the back,
the guy that gives you the card
isn't just a regular guy.
He's a magician that we hired.
And he uses sleight of
hands in one out of every,
say, 20 trials to give you
the card you didn't choose.
So if you chose the
guy on the left,
he would give you the card
with the guy on the right.
And two interesting things
happen in this experiment.
First, people rarely notice.
People rarely say,
you know what?
I chose this one, and you
gave me the other one.
That's all interesting.
But what's more
interesting is that when
they get the card
they didn't pick,
they go on and explain to us
why this was their choice.
So you chose A. I give
you B. You take B,
and you say I wanted B
because of so and so.
Now, it's not
going to work if it
was a significant,
important choice.
I can't replace
your wife or husband
and you would not notice.
I can't replace your
career or your job.
But we are playing with more
and more complex things.
And it turns out we can
change a lot of things
that people think
they would never
be able to explain differently.
So we can change people's
preferences on politics now.
And it works.
So not really Democrat,
Republican, vice versa,
but on some nuanced choices like
gun control and maybe climate
change, we can actually
move you a little bit
just by changing what you
think you have chosen.
And also, we basically can use
that in the context of business
to show you how little you know
about your business choices
when it comes to marketing.
So for example, imagine
you go to the grocery store
to buy a variety of things.
And you have a shopping
list and you go.
And you, at some point, get to
the aisle with the toothpaste.
And you say, OK, toothpaste
is an important choice.
I'm going to actually give
this one a lot of attention.
And you look at the two
options that you have there.
Let's say Colgate and Crest.
And you say, OK.
The one on the left
is more expensive.
But this one is a bit bigger.
And this one is the minty,
but this one is whitening.
And you kind of make a table of
all the things that you think
are important.
Then you make a choice.
You put it in your basket,
and you go on shopping.
If I'm going to go
into your basket
at some point between
the moment you made
the choice and the moment you
get to the checkout counter
and replace the item
with the other option,
chances are that you
won't notice this change.
But not only that, when you
go outside, if I stop you
and I say, hey,
there's a focus group.
We want to know why you
chose this versus that.
You're going to come
up with an answer.
And another thing is
that it's very, very hard
for us to accept the fact
that memories in our mind
are not necessarily true.
We're going to spend a lot of
time protecting our memories.
In fact, there's a
lot of discussion
right now out there about fake
news and fake information.
And people spend a lot of time
challenging and being skeptical
about things coming
in from the outside.
They say, I don't really trust
this piece of information.
I'm going to validate it.
I'm going to argue against it.
If it's something that
we don't really like,
we're going to spend a lot
of mental efforts trying
to convince the person who gives
the thought that they're wrong
or that something is not
right about the fact.
But we never ever challenge the
facts that all them are inside.
This is something
that we protect.
So if you leave this room
right now, and you go
have dinner with
your friends tonight.
And at some point
one of your friends
said, oh, it was amazing what we
did today when we played tennis
at 1:00 PM.
You say, no, no, no.
At 1:00 PM I was in
a talk in my office.
And they say, no, no.
At 1:00 PM, we were
playing tennis.
You'd say, come on.
I remember clearly.
I was in this room.
I can describe it to you.
They're going to start
showing you evidence of video
of yourself playing tennis.
People that were
there telling you,
we were with you playing tennis.
It's going to take a
lot of effort for them
to convince you that you
weren't where you were,
because your mind is set to
protect what it thinks is true.
That is kind of an essential
part of our reality.
We don't challenge things
that are already inside.
And in many ways,
this is what I'm
going to argue is one of
the difficult things we need
to change right now, which is
the fact that our brain isn't
fully in control
of what's going on.
But also that the
memories and the stories
that we tell ourself
are coming up afterwards
and aren't necessarily true.
In fact, my students
made this T-shirt
that I really like
that says, don't
believe everything you think.
Which is kind of a joke,
but also the message
of today's talk, which is
that somehow what's inside
is not guaranteed.
OK.
Up to now, I kind of
give you philosophy.
Let's talk a little bit
more about practical things
we do with people.
So we look at the brain
and try to understand
how the brain actually
encodes information,
how thoughts get inside and
into their brain as thought,
and how we actually
talk about that.
And I assume I don't
have to convince you
too much that the brain is
the seat of your thoughts
and your behaviors.
But we have more and
more evidence right now
from people whose brains change.
And with those changes,
their personality changes
that suggests that
actually really who we are
is in our brain, so much
so that it's stronger
than what we think is us.
I'll give you an example.
You may be familiar with a
story of a woman in San Diego.
And I think eight years ago,
roughly calling the police
and saying, my husband that I've
been married to for the last 10
years became a pedophile.
I don't know what to do.
I'm really worried about
our four-year-old daughter.
You've got to come
and arrest my husband.
And the police indeed come.
And they find child
pornography on his computer.
And they arrest him.
And he goes to court.
And as the trial begins, he
complains about a headache.
And it's ignored on the first
day, ignored on the second day.
On the third day, he has a
seizure in the courthouse.
So they pick him up
and carry him quickly
to the emergency room where a
neurologist looks at his brain.
And what they see is a
massive tumor pressing
on the left front part of his
brain that should have caused
him also pain but
definitely risked his life.
So they sent him straight
from the emergency room
to the operating room
where a surgeon removed
the tumor in a complex surgery.
And then when he wakes up
after 12 hours of surgery,
he no longer has a
tumor, but also he
is no longer a pedophile.
He says, I don't know
what happened to me.
It was embarrassing.
And I'm ashamed.
And I'm guilty.
And I don't know
what to do with that.
And he goes to court.
And in an unprecedented
ruling to that point,
the judge in this court
actually sends him back home.
And she writes in her ruling
that it wasn't his fault,
it was his brain's
fault. Which kind
of calls for a
philosophical idea
of what's the difference
between me and my brain.
And this story is
just one example
of how a change in your brain
changes your personality.
But actually, it
has a twist that
makes it even more interesting.
Because 10 months later,
after the guy is sent home
on probation, the wife calls
a second time and says,
my husband is a pedophile again.
Can you do something about it?
And he's being taken again
to the emergency room
where they look at his brain.
And they say that part
of the tumor came back.
But that's the side.
And it's pressing
on the same area.
And so he is going
into a second procedure
where they take it
out a second time.
And again, he goes back
to his normal behavior.
So this is like a
controlled experiment.
We have it one way,
you have it one way.
You change it, you
behave differently.
And this is just one example
out of many, many examples
we have right now to the
effect that we can actually
change your brain a
little bit, and even
against your
intentional desires,
you will become a
different person
in some aspects of your life.
And it will be hard
for you to go back.
OK.
So now that we kind of accepted
that, the question is--
can we find who you
are in your brain?
Can we change your personality?
And can we also tell you who
you are even when you say,
no, I want the opposite, or
explain to you your choices
maybe even before you make them?
So for a while,
looking at the brain
was done in one of two big ways.
In animals, we can, obviously,
look at the brain directly.
We open the brain--
mice, rats.
We stick electrodes
inside their head.
And those electrodes
are fine microphones
that listen to the
activity of brain cells
in a very, very
accurate and precise way
and tell us, basically,
what the person is
or the animal is thinking about
in a very, very direct way.
That's the ultimate way to study
the brain, looking directly
inside one.
We can do it with animals.
We can't do it with humans,
for obvious reasons.
So instead what we
do with humans is
we study the brain
from the outside
using imaging techniques.
So we use big machines
that inject magnetic fields
or look at the activity
from the outside
and try to infer how the brain
works from looking outside.
Now, if you were to somehow be
able to poke inside the brain
and see what's going on
there, what you will see
is a forest of cells
that look like these.
And if you were
to listen to them,
you would hear the sound
of cells speaking, which
is essentially perfect.
So if you were to translate
the electrochemical chemical
activity of brain cells, how
they speak to each other,
you would hear this.
Basically, these are
electrical discharges of ions,
of movement, of
cells, if you want,
of ions from one
cell to another.
If you put a
microphone next to them
and you translate it into
audio, this is how it sounds.
So those bursts of
activity, those duddududd,
what we call firing is
the language of the brain.
Each cell, when
it speaks, speaks
by changing its firing frequency
from very low to very high.
And if we can tell what
happened in the real world
while those cells
were firing, we
can actually decode what
you're thinking about.
So if every time I show you a
picture of your mom, one cell
fires, we would say that
this correlation indicates
that this is part of a network
of cells that code thinking
about your mom.
OK.
So this is how thoughts
look in the brain.
And this is where
I also tell you
that I lied to you
a few minutes ago.
And now I'm going to be
clear about what we do.
So I told you that
there was actually
two ways to study the brain.
With animals, we
can look inside.
And with humans, we
look at the outside.
But my lab is part of
a small group of labs,
about five labs in the world,
that actually do what I just
said was impossible, which is
look at the brains of humans
from the inside.
What we do is we
open people's brains.
We stick electrodes
inside their head.
And we eavesdrop on the
activity of individual cells
in their brain while they
think, while they're awake,
while they're talking, trying
to understand how it works.
And I'm here to look for
volunteers for this project.
[LAUGHTER]
What we do is we
work with patients
who undergo brain surgery
for clinical purposes.
And we piggyback on
the clinical procedure
to also study the brain
for research purposes.
So I'm going to show
you now how it looks.
If you don't like
pictures of brains,
this is the time to look away.
I'm going to show it
for a brief moment,
and I'm going to skip that.
This is roughly how it looks.
Electrodes on the surface of
the brain that are tiny enough
to be able to decode the
activity of individual cells
in the brains of a patient.
When we wrap it up and close
it, it looks like that.
So this is-- now you can
look back if you looked away.
This is the gist of our studies.
Patients come.
Our patients typically
have a brain disorder
that they couldn't
resolve in any other way.
In the last two
years, so to speak,
is coming to a
clinical procedure
where the neurosurgeons are
going to open their brain
and try to identify
the spot in their brain
that is the main onset
location for their problem.
So think of epilepsy,
for example.
Epilepsy typically is
an anomaly in your brain
where one cell in your
brain, so to speak,
starts firing with no
reason, no provocation.
Kind of like an
earthquake in your brain.
And it speaks and
other cells answer.
And other cells answer those.
So those cells answer.
And before long,
there is a cacophony
of cells speaking in your brain.
And when those cells
speak in your brain,
they actually lead to a
change in your behavior.
So when cells speak
without any provocation,
maybe you start shaking
or losing consciousness
and falling down.
And the risk, of course, is
that you maybe will have a car
accident if you drive your car.
Or maybe you drop your baby
if you're holding your baby.
So the risks are beyond
just epilepsy, the risk
for through life.
Most patients with epilepsy
get treated with medications
that suppress the seizures.
But if they can't respond
with medications or something
doesn't work, they
become candidates
for this procedure where we're
going to bring them to the lab,
open their brain,
stick electrodes
in the area in their
brain where we think
or suspect the
seizure's onset are.
We'll plug those
wires to a computer.
And we'll start recording
their brain activity
24/7 for the next couple of
days while they sit there
and wait to have a seizure.
Now, we want them
to have a seizure.
Because when they
have a seizure,
we can actually trace the
seizure's flow in their brain
as it goes and figure out
exactly where it started.
And once we have enough seizures
to identify the location,
we can actually take
out the electrodes,
resect the part of their
brain that started seizures,
close everything, and send
the patient away seizure free.
So that's the clinical
purpose of this procedure.
And what I do is I say
to the patient, you know,
you're already here.
You have electrodes
in your brain,
and we're recording
your acuity all the time
while you watch TV, read
books, talk to your friends.
Do you mind also letting me
show you a picture of Colgate
and Crest and see how
you make decisions
and understand how thinking
works in your brain?
Now, patients are very
happy to participate,
because they really can't
move their head much.
And this is most of what
they do in the hospital is
talking to us.
So now we have a chance
for us to actually look
at the brain of a
human from the inside
and eavesdrop on the activity
of cells in their brain
and see how thinking
looks from inside.
So here is an example
of how it looks.
So here is one patient.
What you see here are
the images that they
see on a screen in
front of their eyes.
And what I'm going
to play to you
is the sound of one cell
in their brain that codes
something.
Try to see if you can
figure out for yourself what
this cell codes.
What is the thought that
this cell responds to?
[AUDIO PLAYBACK]
[TAPPING SOUNDS]
[END PLAYBACK]
MORAN CERF: So this is the
cell in this woman's brain
that codes the thought
of Marilyn Monroe.
Every time she thinks of
Marilyn Monroe, this cell fires.
In fact, in your
brains right now,
if you know what
Marilyn Monroe is
or who she is, or have
any concept of her,
every time you think about
that, cells in your brain
come to life.
And they do the same
thing right now.
This is how a thought
looks inside the brain.
Now, what's interesting is
that this is not just a thought
that's specific to this image.
It's every representation of
the idea of Marilyn Monroe.
And we know it because
I can do many things.
We can actually show her not
just one picture stimulus,
we can actually show her,
for instance, movies.
And you'll see that when she
sees a movie with Marilyn
Monroe, the same cell fires
in a different pattern
but the same idea.
So you hear the cell again.
You see different movies.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- (SINGING) I was
young and unafraid.
- I'm flying!
- Everybody who comes to
Hollywood has a dream.
What's your dream?
- I have a dream that one day--
- (SINGING) I wish
I had a man who--
[END PLAYBACK]
MORAN CERF: And the
activities sustain
as long as the thought
is in this person's mind.
And what's even
more remarkable is
that it doesn't have to
come from the outside.
If you close your eyes and
imagine Marilyn Monroe,
the same thoughts would
occur in your brain,
and the same cells would fire.
And we know that because we
tried that with our patients.
One of my colleagues
actually had the patient
sit there and just
recall from her memory
the clips she has
seen in the morning.
What you're going to
see now is that when
the patient remembers Marilyn
Monroe, the same cell fires.
And in fact, it fires
seconds before she speaks.
So we see her thoughts
coming to her.
[AUDIO PLAYBACK]
[TAPPING SOUNDS]
[END PLAYBACK]
MORAN CERF: This
means that we can now
look inside the
patient's brain and see
how her thoughts emerge.
And what's interesting
here isn't just
that we can decode
her thoughts, but also
that we can decode them
earlier than she expresses them
and even earlier than she
thinks she thought them.
So if you ask the
woman, when did you
think about Marilyn Monroe?
She would say, when I said
that or a fraction of a second
before.
She wouldn't imagine
that in her brain
there are cells that come to
life that code that thought
a second before she speaks.
In fact, when I talk
to you right now,
I don't really feel
that anything I'm saying
is being planned
in my mind before.
I feel that whatever
I think it, I say it.
And the reality is that you
and I are both witnesses
of my brain happening.
It's just that I
own it, and I think
that I wanted to say it because
it came out of my mouth.
We both experience whatever my
mind is saying in real time,
but one of us thinks
that it must be something
that I really, really feel
comfortable with because it
came out of my mouth.
And we don't experience
those processes that
come up with the verb, and
the structure, and the vowels,
and put them together,
and the adjective,
and build it-- and
build the idea.
We just see the bottom line.
And we call this my thoughts.
Now, once we find
thoughts in your brain,
and we can actually
decode them, there's
a lot of stuff we
can do with it.
Beyond just predict what
you're going to say,
we can also do all kinds of
things that are now really
in the public eye
a lot, which is
connect your brain
essentially to machines
and have you connect or control
things on the outside world.
So we can do things like have
the patient sit there in bed
and play games with her mind.
So she just sits there and
thinks of Marilyn Monroe.
And when she does,
the spaceship goes up.
And you can have her
play a game where
she tries to avoid
obstacles just
by thinking of Marilyn Monroe.
And we can kind of--
punishing her or giving her
a reward for doing that.
We can do that, of course,
to show that we can do it.
But the idea behind
it is that we
can take people who
lost the ability
to control some
parts of their bodies
because the connection
was severed--
think of soldiers
who were hit, say,
from the neck down and
now have no connection
from the mind to the arms.
And we can now
read their thoughts
and control a prosthetic
arm that will actually
activate their wheelchair, or
turn the channels on the TV,
or write emails for
them, or do everything
that they can't do with
their motor activity
themselves just by thinking
their thoughts in their mind.
And we can also do the
most interesting thing
that I could think of
in terms of neuroscience
right now, which is decode a
person's thought in real time.
So our main work,
a few years ago,
was one where we basically
had patients sit in bed,
think on one of multiple
things that we found earlier
in the morning in their brain--
Marilyn Monroe, Michael
Jackson, their mom, their dad,
the Eiffel Tower,
anything we could find
in the morning in their brain.
And we can just decode
and project their thoughts
on a screen in
front of their eyes.
Now, what's really
interesting about that
is, first, that we can do that.
But also that once
we can do that,
we can actually find
how early can we tell
what you're going to think?
And so at what point is your
brain taking those thoughts
and making them into
a conscious person?
At what point is your brain
calling all of that reality?
And the interesting thing
is that it's not obviously
happening in real time.
In fact, it doesn't
happen necessarily at all.
So here's an example.
Here's a picture of
what you all see.
It's kind of flickering.
And I can tell you that
your brain is already
upset at this picture.
And it tells that something
is not right here.
It's just that you don't listen.
Your consciousness
isn't aware of it.
So what you see here is actually
not just one but two pictures.
They alternate.
And there is one aspect
of the picture that
keeps changing and coming back.
And I can tell you that
your brains all see it.
In your brain, there is a
cell that right now fires
and stops and fires and stops.
It just doesn't tell
your consciousness.
Try to see if you can-- raise
your hand if you can see it.
Don't say it.
Just raise your hand.
So those of you who don't
see it right now get nervous.
You're starting to scan the
picture from top to bottom,
left to right, maybe
the Canada flag.
Maybe it's the shadow
of the soldier.
You count the soldiers.
You look at the number of
windows on the airplane.
It's the engines in center.
Here I'm going to point it out.
The good thing is that once
you've seen it right now,
you can never not see it.
This is it.
It's one time learning.
So for the rest of your life,
it's going to be in your brain
right now.
And what's interesting
beyond the fact
that it's a cool experiment
is the idea that in your brain
there is some cells
that code engines.
And those cells were firing
and stopping and firing
and stopping all the time.
It's just that somewhere
it didn't bubble up
into your consciousness.
And you, even though
you wanted it,
couldn't get the
part of your brain
that told it to give it to you.
So somewhere in
your brain there was
a gap between who
knows the answer
and who's actually in control.
I'll show you another example.
So if you felt smart
on the first one,
you have a chance
to try another one.
Raise your hand when you see it.
This one is harder,
it seems, to people.
It actually correlates with IQ.
If you didn't see
both, then, eh--
no.
It does not correlate with IQ.
OK.
It's the leaves right here--
a little harder.
So we can go on and on
with many other examples.
But the point is
somewhere in your brain,
someone knows something,
and it doesn't tell you.
Now, if I know this person
in your brain saw something,
and I can find it in a
gap that's big enough,
I can actually not just find
it out but also change things.
And where we're going with
that is one step further, which
is to see what happens
if I change something
before the time you
become aware of it
and actually make you have
a different experience
of reality.
So one of the things we
did with our patients--
we had them play a
game where we said,
we're going to have you
make simple choices.
Again, very basic.
We give them a wooden box
with two big red buttons--
one on the left,
one on the right.
And we tell them
this is an experiment
about making decisions.
For the next 20 minutes, we
ask you to just sit here.
And whenever you feel like,
press the buttons on the left
or on the right in random order.
So left, right, right, left,
left, right, left, and so on.
Nothing important,
just makes no sense.
We're going to want to know how
your brain looks when you make
decisions to go left or right.
That's it.
But as always,
there's a twist here.
We told the patient, by the way,
because we care about choices,
every time you press
a button, we're
going to turn the
lights on for a second
just to save the
data from your brain.
This is how we know
that we are saving.
So when we're saving,
please don't touch anything.
Wait for it to turn
off, and then you
can start on our trial.
So important-- when the lights
are on, don't touch anything.
And we let the patient
start the game.
And for the first
maybe 50 trials,
the patient just
presses the buttons,
and we just leave their
brain activity normally.
But after 50 trials or so, when
we feel like we can actually
decode their thoughts far before
he or she are executing them,
we actually start
the real experiment.
Where if it's times zero, I
know that in four seconds,
they are going to
press the buttons.
I wait 3.9 and turn
them on on their own.
So when you press the buttons,
the light's already on.
And there's a big
buzzer in the room.
And we tell you,
what did you do?
You just ruined the experiment.
We told you not to do one thing.
Don't touch the button if
the lights are already on.
I'm so sorry, doctor, it
kind of happened by itself.
Never mind, you just
ruined everything.
We're going to start and make
sure you don't do it again.
What you see is this
unique experience,
the patient's experience,
where what they want to happen
has already happened.
And they can try
to do it faster.
They can try to
kind of trick us.
They go to the right
and then to the left.
But it doesn't matter,
I'm inside their head.
As soon as they
know, I already know.
So here is kind of how it looks.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[BUZZER]
[END PLAYBACK]
MORAN CERF: And
what's remarkable is
this kind of experience that
we all can think about but not
really believe it.
When I tell you your thoughts
are known to me before, you
kind of say, that's
cool, but I don't really
experience life like this.
We call it the
illusion of free will.
We all can talk about free
will as a philosophical idea,
but we actually believe
that we are in control.
And these patients,
for the first time,
have this unique
experience that they really
feel this experience
of not having control.
You go to the restaurant.
You see there's three
items on the menu--
steak, salmon, and salad.
And you say I want steak-- say,
oh, sorry, we're out of salad.
Oh, I was about to say salad.
Never mind.
Steak or salmon.
Oh, there's no salmon also.
We basically eliminate
things from your life
before you made them.
And this gives you this
experience of lack of control
in a very unique way, which we
try to extend to psychology.
What's interesting here
actually isn't that.
What's interesting
is what happens next.
So the fact that I can actually
change things in the world
before you experience them,
because I know them early
is cool, but not surprising.
Once I find the cells, I
can do whatever I want.
What actually is
interesting is if we can
do something even more complex.
So if I know at time
zero that in four seconds
you're going press the
button, I can wait 3.9 seconds
and turn the button
on my myself,
but I can also turn the lights
on as soon as I know it.
And if I turn the lights
on when I know it,
it's so early that
you don't even
know that you were
about to know something.
And in fact, what
happens is the patient
sits there and see lights
turning on, off, on, off.
And they have no
understanding of why
those lights turn on and off.
They don't know that it's
their brain who wanted it,
because the lights
turning on actually
stops their brain
from experiencing it.
But their brain knows it,
because it sent the signal.
So what happens is
that there was actually
a conversation here
between me and their brain
behind their back.
And we know that it's
true because at some point
the cells in their
brain stops functioning.
Because they kind
of see that they
set an action to be
happening, and it
didn't happen multiple times.
So they just think
something doesn't work
and just moved to
a different-- will
tend to go back afterwards.
So there's a unique
opportunity here
to speak to someone's
brain behind their back
and really get a
sense of the person
and their unconscious mind.
And the reason
it's interesting is
because we live life through
the part of the brain that's
in the conscious part.
And we call this me.
We think this is us.
And now, for the first
time, we can actually
give those patients access
to a part of their brain
that they normally
have no control over.
Most of our brain is actually
not under our control.
When you see the world,
it's already in color.
Some part of your brain had to
add the color, decode shapes
and orientations.
And when you see,
it's only in color.
And if I tell you, please
make the world black,
you can't do it.
Even though your brain has
the capacity to change color,
you can't really turn
it off, because it's
happening under
the hood in places
that there are not access to.
Even things that are
more accessible to us
are far from our control--
emotions.
Emotions are something you
can actually kind of control.
You have some access to them,
but they aren't really fully
under your control.
You don't say, you
know, my mom is sick.
I want to feel sad.
I'm going to activate
sadness right now.
OK.
Deactivate sadness.
It's not working like this.
They don't own us.
We can control the inputs,
but at the same time,
the emotions happen, and we
kind of are witnesses to them.
Now, with these patients, for
the first time in history,
we can actually put
electrodes in those places
where colors happen, where
emotions happen, where
breathing happens,
and teach them how
to control their brain in
a different experience.
So we have now works
where we teach patients
how to control their emotions.
We put in electrodes in the
emotional part of the brain
and tell them, using
feedback, that something
that they did right
now actually sends
the feedback to the emotion.
We tell them now learn how to
control your fear so you won't
feel afraid or actually
feel afraid and just change
the levels.
We can actually let them
control their breathing.
So up to now, we define
a person as alive
or dead by looking at
the part of their brain
that controls their breathing.
And if it's not active,
we call this person dead.
With our patients,
whenever it works,
we can actually teach
them how to move
the control of their
breathing to a different part
of their brain.
So they seem like they
are dead in many ways,
but actually they are just
controlling their breathing
on a different parts.
And the idea is that now we
unlock a lot more of our brain.
All of our brain is active, but
only a small percentage of it
is under our control.
And now with those electrodes, I
can put it in different places,
plus feedback from
those patients,
we can actually teach
people how to control them.
So I want to use
also the last five
minutes to talk about
something inspiring.
And for that I have to
connect our work to what
we're doing right now and
where I think it's heading.
First, a little bit of history--
so October 28, 2010, is when
the work I mentioned to you
right now came to life,
as in we published it.
It was published in
a very high profile
journal, academic journal.
And because of that, a
lot of people in the world
cared about our work.
And journalists called me and
asked me questions about it.
And one of them was a
journalist from BBC England who
said we're really curious about
how you can project people's
thoughts on the screen.
Tell me about that.
And I explained the
work a little bit.
And then he says, what
else can you do with that?
Like if you can project
someone's thoughts,
can you project their emotions
on the screen, or maybe
their memories, or their dreams?
And I say, in theory,
it's possible.
Thank you, bye.
So the last thing
that happened was
that I told someone from
BBC that dream recording is
possible in theory.
However, the theory was lost
quickly in the headline.
And before long, the title was
dream recording is possible.
And they were still kind
of in quotation marks
making it seemingly
maybe possible.
But this didn't stay with
quotation marks very long.
About five minutes into the
moment our work came out,
the entire world was up
in arms about the fact
that scientists are
recording your dreams.
And quickly, not just
recording your dreams,
but there were questions about--
how we did it, and how long
have we been doing that?
People started
calling me and saying
they want to subpoena me
because I've been involved
or approached by the CIA
to record their dreams
for the last couple of years.
People called me
and asked me if I
can look at their spouse's
dreams, a lot of that.
There was actually a
chef, not far from here,
who is a famous chef
in New York, who
said that he's been dreaming
of a recipe for years now,
and he wants me to put
electrodes in his brain
and extract them.
A big operating system
company called us
and wanted the option to build
a coding machine in the next OS.
And when I told them
it doesn't exist,
they say I'm
playing hard to get,
and they are going
to build their own.
There were websites and
Wikipedia pages for the dream
recording machine.
And the world was
excited about this thing.
This was, in fact, for a
few days the number one
story on science and tech--
the recording.
And despite me saying to
everyone, it's impossible,
the story had a life of its own.
I was pretty frightened, as you
can imagine, from this thing.
I called my dad, who
was a journalist,
and I said, Dad, how
do you kill a story?
And he said, son, no
one cares about science.
Just turn off the
phone and wait.
It's going to die on its own.
It didn't happen.
Because I didn't take calls,
it just came via email
and a lot more attention
was given to it.
In fact, my not answering
just made it worse.
The worst thing I did
was, because it came out
in October 28, three days
after it was Halloween,
my students had the
idea that we were going
to go to a Halloween party.
And I had the idea to
make a joke of this
and dress up like Sigmund Freud.
So this is days of
really massive sharing.
That picture came
out, and now there
was not just like a
headline, but also a picture
of me looking ridiculous.
And this was kind of in my
life for about two weeks
as a career killing experience.
But what was interesting is
that I spent a lot of time
talking to the
news and explaining
to everyone that
recording is impossible,
and that we didn't do it.
And that it's not really
how our work could be done,
because we only look at
patients when they were awake.
And nothing could work
when they were sleeping.
And this story actually
died when Prince William
proposed to his girlfriend.
And this was like a much
more important thing.
And it was out of my life
for a number of years,
until one day in April of 2013,
I got a call from BBC again.
And they asked me to comment
again on dream recording.
I said, we've been through
it before, you know,
it's not true.
And look, this is the time to
actually correct the mistake.
And they said, wait, wait stop.
We know that you didn't do that.
But we actually want to comment
on the work of Yuki Kamitani
from Japan who did it.
So it turns out that
a group in Japan
didn't know that
it's impossible.
And they just saw
that someone did it,
and they just followed
up on our work.
They actually wanted to
improve on the same technique
that we didn't use.
And they were the first guys to
do what we said was impossible.
They were the first guys to
actually record the dreams.
They did it in a technique
that was developed in Berkeley
by a guy called Jack Gallant
where basically the idea is
that you put electrodes
next to a part of your brain
that decodes visual
activities-- and not really
the thoughts like we do, not
Marilyn Monroe, but just lines
and shapes.
And essentially, when
people were awake,
looked at their brain
activity in the back
and realized that they
could actually decode.
On the left is a movie
that people were watching.
And on the right is
what the computer
suggests the person was seeing.
And this was done
using FMRI, which
is a much more crude
tool than the one we use.
Instead of looking at Marilyn
Monroe, you would see a person,
or you would see a woman.
That's about it.
But the idea is that
the group in Japan
could actually have
people go to a scanner
and lie down there while
their brain is being scanned.
And fortunately,
from my experience,
undergrads tend to fall
asleep in every study
that you put them.
So it was very easy to get
them to fall asleep in the lab.
And when they fall
asleep, a computer
basically looks at
their brain activity
and tries to decode one of a
small number of categories.
Is it text?
Is it an object?
Is it a person?
And we turned out to
be pretty good in being
able to then wake up the
patient and ask the person,
tell me what you
think you dreamed of
and get a sense of the
narrative, if you want,
or at least kind of gist
of what they're dreaming.
And this unlocks
one of the coolest,
I think, things in
human experiment
and the idea of
looking inside dreams.
Now, dreams have fascinated
humans for the last--
for millennia.
And not only are
they fascinating,
but they also are in our mind
the kind of access to our soul.
You know, if you wake up and you
tell your girlfriend that you
had a dream about
your ex-girlfriend,
she's going to be upset
with your awake self.
And you can say, no, it was my
brain that created this movie.
I'm not responsible.
But somehow we get blamed
for our brain's movies.
And in that sense,
whether it's true or not,
we all think our
dreams mean a lot.
There is entire
set of professions
that try to interpret dreams.
The psychiatrist who spend--
psychologists spend
days on couches
with people trying to have
them tell their stories.
And the reality is, whether
they mean something or not,
we don't know the
full understanding.
But for the first
time in history,
we can actually decode that.
And that's remarkable,
because up to now
we had to rely on
your awake self
to tell us the story
of your dreaming self.
And we know that the awake
self and the dreaming self
are not aligned.
We don't know the
language you use
to tell your dreams,
for instance,
is the language of
your awake self.
If you are blind
when you are awake,
you surely will tell your story
as if your dreams were not
with visuals.
In the 1930s, people would
describe their dreams
in black and white.
Only when TV and film
started to have colors would
people start describing
their dreams in color.
Because somehow, in their
mind, a dream is a movie,
and so whatever it was,
movies in their mind,
is how they described
their dreams.
Which means that whatever
we have as awake people
is the language we use
to share our dreams.
And this is unreliable.
And for many, many
decades, we couldn't really
know what's going
on in your dreams,
because we only
had the awake self.
And now, for the
first time in history,
we can actually look
inside your dreams
and actually decode the
content and compare first
to what your brain
tells me happens inside,
and what you say, but also
get access to something
that you might have
forgotten when you woke up.
And this isn't just
a cool thing that
allows us to actually
project dreams and tell you
the story that you
had in mind and see
how they aligned to what it is.
It also allows us
to change behavior.
Because what we learned
in the last three years
is that when you're sleeping,
your brain isn't just resting.
It's actually
overworking, if you want,
and doing a lot of things.
And one of those
things is actually
choosing behavior
that it wants to save
and one that it
wants to eliminate.
So that when you wake up,
you have a different story
to craft.
And if you go back
to the beginning
where I told you that all
our consciousness does
is taking memories and
building them into a narrative,
now we know when it happens.
We know that at some
point during the night,
there is a window of time--
it happens every 90 minutes--
where your brain essentially
looks at all the memory
it has for the day and chooses
which ones to encapsulate,
which ones to eliminate.
And if we go to the brain
at this moment and change
something, we can actually
create a new memory
so that when you wake up, you're
going to build into a narrative
and change your behavior.
Now, just a theory, in one of
the studies that my colleague
did a few years ago in 2015.
She took smokers
who come to the lab
and are asked to take a nap.
That's all.
They don't tell anything.
They're going to take a nap.
And when they get to
the specific window
when your brain
essentially assesses what's
important in life, she
sprayed the smell of nicotine
into their nose making
their brain focus right now
on smoking as a thought.
And then immediately,
she sprayed the smell
of rotten eggs, which
is a smell that's
known to scientists to
actually penetrate your brain
and make you have aversive
response without waking you up.
So she pairs in
this person's brain
the idea of nicotine and
bad experiences, multiple
in different concentrations.
Now when a person wakes up
after two hours, not only
do they not know what
happened, they actually
think that it was
just a regular nap,
but their brain internalized
the conditioning.
And for the week
after, they actually
don't smoke or
smoke very little.
It functionally goes
back afterwards.
So we didn't find the solution
to changing it entirely,
but we find a way to start
teaching your brain things
that you will actually live
by afterwards without knowing
what happened.
And of course, we
have to try right now
to do it repeatedly
and see if it sustains.
Do it more strongly
and see if it actually
changes them entirely.
But now we know when your brain
actually stores and creates
memories.
Then if we come in
between and change things,
you're going to
do the work for us
in making those
into a narrative,
a conscious perception of
yourself never smoking or never
being in this room with us.
And then you will
actually use that to tell
a different story of yourself.
OK.
So why am I telling
you all of that--
and with this I'm about to end--
because we kind of unlocked
the meaning of thoughts.
We know the code of a thought.
And we know how to find
them in your brain.
We're now able to map them and
be able to project them outside
and actually use that to
get access to what you're
about to do before you do that.
That's pretty cool.
We can also look at that in
specific moments in your life
and change things that
are under the hood,
so you will only experience
them after the fact
and just defend them as
if they were your thoughts
and live a life that
aligns with them.
And we now can use that
to even look at your brain
and change your behavior
in a massive way, such
that you will actually
stop all kinds of behavior
that you don't like.
And now we are playing with the
idea of actually coding dreams
into your mind and actually
going inside and making
a story for you.
So you can actually go to sleep
and buy the dream by Spielberg,
and you know, have
that Spielberg dream.
Or actually see if we can
align people's dreams.
So take two people
who sleep side by side
and actually make sure
that they actually
have somehow related dreams.
So you go on a date.
And you come back home.
And the date doesn't end.
You actually continue
the dream together.
Or the ultimate
goal of this work
is to try to see
if we can actually
teach you a new thing
when you're dreaming.
So you can go to
sleep and wake up
knowing Kung Fu--
not working so far.
But besides all of that
lies the coolest thing
which I'm going to end
with, that I started with,
that I want to finish with.
And that is the idea that
we now actually change
the center or the locus
of control in our brain.
So we live life like the
character from the King Kong
game that I showed--
Donkey Kong game
earlier thinking
that we are controlling
the character.
And we give more and
more evidence to people
that we're not, but it
doesn't change anything.
We still think that
we are in control.
And it's because it's
hard for us to change it.
It's hard for us
to accept the fact
that my brain has components
that make decisions,
and I'm aware of those
only after the fact
and just explain them.
But there's a good analogy
here that I really like.
It allows me to at least
accept it partially.
And I think that
if you follow this,
and if you just accept this
partial understanding that I'm
suggesting right now, it
will help you in the future.
And then can take
questions about how
we can actually implement this.
And this is an analogy
from 408 years ago
when Galileo Galilei
pointed his telescope
to the moons of Jupiter and
tried to observe their orbit.
What he saw was that the
planets were not orbiting--
the moons weren't orbiting
the planet the way
he thought they should go.
And the only way
to explain this was
to change the entire
making of the solar system
and put the sun in
the center and Earth
as the third planet from center.
Now, this, to him, felt
like a failure of society.
What does it mean that we are
not the center of the universe?
not the most important thing
in the world?
But once he accepted it, he was
able to see outside of what we
thought the world was before.
He could see far outside
into the wild reaches
of the universe.
And in the 400
years to follow, we
were able to explore
the big universe
and see a lot more
of what's out there.
Now, in the same way,
in the last 10 years,
beginning to understand
that we're not
the center of our own
universe, but in our own head,
there are many, many planets,
if you want, many voices.
And the one we speak with is
not the most important one.
It's just the one we
call us, because it's
the one we have
most control over.
And if we begin to
understand that there's
other voices there, and that
we can actually give access
to those voices using electrodes
or using other methods,
we can actually uncover
more of what's in your brain
and tell you what your dreams
mean, what your choices mean,
how you arrived at
them, and so on.
And in that sense,
we're not only
going to uncover the
mysteries of the brain,
we're going to understand
the most interesting thing
in the universe, which is us.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
All right.
So now we can talk about
the philosophy of that,
or business, or on
anything that I want,
which is to convince you that
there is a need for people
with the understanding of
machine learning and coding
in this field.
I made it seem easy.
It's just like listening
to brain activity.
But the reality is that most of
the problems we have right now
are just time series
that we need to decode.
We know that something
happened in the real world,
that the brain was
coding it, and we want
to know what connects what.
So there's a room for a
lot of knowledge here.
Questions?
Yes.
AUDIENCE: There
is-- there's a ton.
I have two, actually.
One is maybe simpler to answer.
It seems to me that
there is a huge need
for enhanced resolution
with noninvasive mechanisms.
Can you tell us something
about the latest developments
in that?
MORAN CERF: Sure.
So there is a big
movement right now.
It tries to basically
use these results
and make things that go inside
your brain to control them.
You probably heard about Brian
Johnson and Elon Musk trying
to go there.
Generally, we want to poke
inside our brain and control
things.
The problem is that
the only way we
know how to get
in the brain right
now is to dig a hole
in it and get inside.
And this is not something
that you all can try at home.
So the science of
that is pretty easy.
Look, we know the
language of the brain.
We know how to do it.
The question is, how
do we get inside?
The leading technique right
now that people look into
is ingestible.
We are trying to create
pills that you will swallow.
And they will travel inside
your blood brain barrier,
and get to your brain, and live
there, and do things for you
permanently.
So we know how to create viruses
that can go in specific cells
and live there.
And we try to find the
same way with pills.
It's raising a lot of
ethical questions and so on.
And it also--
I'm going make a prediction.
I'll tell you how I think
it's going to work out.
One Silicon Valley
rich guy is going
to just poke a hole inside
his or her person's brain
and stick a chip inside that
will connect their thoughts
straight to the World Wide Web.
And this would allow
them to have advantages.
They would do high frequency
trading inside their head
faster.
They would solve
math problems faster.
And they play chess
better than you,
because they have
access to that world.
And everyone's going to think
they're insane for doing that.
But then they're going to
think, oh, they have advantage,
I should do it the same.
And within a few years, it's
going to become widespread,
and everyone's going
to do it themselves.
And then it becomes mainstream.
It's not entirely
science fiction.
It happened before in the
'50s or '40s, I think.
The idea of a putting
silicon inside your breast
seemed like an outrageous idea.
Who was going to put
something inside their breast?
I think that right now,
what is it, 70 years later,
one out of four
American girls age 16
ask for a breast implants
when she turns 16 birthday.
So I think it's
quick from the moment
someone does it and looks
crazy to the moment we actually
all accept it.
So that's my prediction.
Very few, very soon,
inside of a brain.
Second question, then we take--
AUDIENCE: So sorry--
I just really want to ask this.
So it seems to me that a lot
of the studies and experiences
you've described deal
with decisions that
are not very consequential.
Or to describe it differently--
that people do not
have a conscious
interest in modifying.
And this kind of
thinking about this
makes me think about
thinking fast and slow.
And you know, it doesn't seem
like their executive function,
the prefrontal cortex,
were involved there
or at least that they
tried to initiate them.
So this description of
you living as a bystander
to decisions that
are already made
seems to me to be like a
partial description of reality
that applies to certain things,
but that you're probably
able to regain control if you
apply other parts of your brain
to.
Is that correct?
What can you tell us about that?
MORAN CERF: So up to now, we
try to change simple things,
like choice, so people
they don't know.
And when we try even behavior,
like we change your life,
and you pick the one
you like the most,
and you pick your wife, and
we give you someone else,
you would notice right away.
So it doesn't work with
consequential choices
on the behavioral part.
However, the smoking experiment
is indicative with the fact
that actually we
can change behaviors
that were at least something
that you were doing habitually.
So the smoking
experiment-- we now
have one where we try to
make people eat healthy.
Again, they go to sleep.
They can nap.
We essentially activate the
flavor of fat in their brain.
When they wake up, we
say here's a buffet.
Choose what you want.
And they choose
themselves to eat healthy.
This is starting to go in a
world that is a little bit more
like real life.
But it's still not--
like it's still simple choices.
I don't think we can have you
go to sleep a Republican, wake
up a Democrat, or vise versa--
yet.
AUDIENCE: Thanks.
MORAN CERF: Right.
AUDIENCE: Thanks for that talk.
It was mind blowing.
So I work in advertising.
And you know, it's interesting
that you brought up, like,
Sigmund Freud, because
advertising and public
relations and Sigmund
Freud and psychology
have done this work
for the past century.
And all the examples that you
gave are really awe inspiring.
And they were coming
from individuals wanting
to change their own behavior.
But the field that
I'm in right now
is really interested in
cognitive behavioral theory,
choice architecture,
where it's not necessarily
I want to be a better person.
It's like I have a product,
and I want you to buy it.
And this terrifies
me, because it just
seems like one more
tool in the toolbox.
And as exciting
as this is I just
have this disturbing
vision where
you have the rich dude
in Silicon Valley that
has super powers.
And then 97% of
people on earth are
having choices made for them,
like the person that thinks
they're choosing the button.
MORAN CERF: OK.
AUDIENCE: How do you see it?
MORAN CERF: That's
like a set up question.
Absolutely.
So this can be used to make
people stop smoking or eat
healthy, but it can
also make you wake up
and want Coca-Cola
better than Pepsi.
And it works the same way.
The brain doesn't know
what thought that you--
so it's absolutely risky.
I mean, if I were to
choose my dream audience,
this would be this room,
because you, in many ways,
are the ones able to
navigate that choice.
It would take forever until
what we found right now,
how we did it, will turn into
a regulation by the government
and something that's--
so then it's going to be
self-regulation for now.
The companies will have
to decide how to use that.
And in the same way,
we understand that we
can make people eat healthy.
We can also make them do things
that are not great for them.
And what I would say if
I talked to my students,
I would say I hope I could speak
to people that actually have
the power to do it right now.
So I mean historically--
I teach MBA students.
And when I teach them, they're
still young and kind of pure.
And we talk about
cognitive biases.
behavioral changes.
And they all are up in arms
when you speak about Proctor
and Gamble price is tied at
$6.99, but it's actually $7.00,
but it's fooling your senses.
And then they go and work
for Proctor and Gamble,
and they do the same choices.
Because it's like shoulders
and pressure and so on.
I think that science is only
so good in offering options.
And then the world has to
decide what to do with them.
AUDIENCE: Do you have
any tips for someone
like me when somebody
comes and says,
this thing's going
to be amazing.
It's going to drive
so many conversions.
It's going to be so effective.
Other than it just feels wrong?
MORAN CERF: I will think of
a better one than right now,
because I think it's--
but I mean, you seem young.
But I think in 20
years, you're going
to be the CEO of this company.
So at least, let's agree that
when you're going to CEO,
you remember this moment.
So I'm optimistic.
I think that the world is
actually getting better.
So the fact that you asked
this question means that it's
right away you see the problem.
You see the potential.
Is it opportunity
instead of threat?
And I think that's
a great first step.
And the reality is
that every time I
give this talk with
a different version,
people face these
questions, which
means that we all
see that, and we're
both customers and
like companies.
So if you do it to one
person in the evening,
they're going to do
it the day after.
So I think that--
historically, humans are
not great in using science
for good.
We usually find
ways to exploit it.
But I'm optimistic still.
So that's my thought.
To ask questions?
Great.
AUDIENCE: Hello.
Thanks a lot for the
inspiration talk.
I'm just wondering--
so would you
consider your experiment as a
counterexample to free will?
Do you have any response
from philosophers yet?
MORAN CERF: OK.
So I get asked a lot about free
will as a philosophical idea.
And the reality is that we don't
have a good answer in the sense
that-- so we get you
beyond the moment
you experience free will.
So if I ask you when you made
a choice to go left or right,
you would say now.
And we show you that
this was a mistake.
Surely the moment you made a
choice is not the moment that
really made a choice.
We can go back
milliseconds, seconds,
before the choice was made and
predict it with high accuracy.
But it doesn't mean that
there's no free will.
It just maybe happened before.
Maybe free will
happened at time zero,
and just you experienced
it as free will times four.
So we don't have
the answer to it.
It's like the Big Bang theory.
We can go all the way
to the very beginning,
but we couldn't go beyond.
I can tell you that we ask
questions of our subjects
in this experiment.
And we can say that
there's psychology,
like the patients
when they experience
that their choices
are being predicted,
they do have all kinds of
questioning about more life,
like they become a little bit
more protective of rights.
They defend criminals
a little bit different.
It kind of brings big
questions about life.
The counter answer is an example
that I read a few weeks ago.
There is a gene that if you
carry this gene, I think,
you're nine times more likely
to be involved in a crime.
Generally, I think nine
of the people in death row
carry this gene.
And there's other
statistics about this.
And it's the Y chromosome.
So most bad things
are caused by men.
So we can predict
when you're born
that you're going to be on
the side of potentially bad--
it doesn't allow us to
do anything about it.
We have to wait for
you to do those things.
So when we came to judges with
our results and said, look,
we can actually help you decode
the intentions of people.
And they said, look, you
guys, scientists came to us
in the 1920s with
phrenology, and you told us
that you can touch the scalp
and figure out when someone
is going to do something bad.
And then you came to us 10 years
after and you said, no, no.
This was a mistake.
EEG's the right way to go.
And then you came to us
in the '70s with FMRI.
And now you're coming
to us with your tools.
We're going to wait a
few decades before we're
going to let you actually
predict behavior,
because you change your mind.
And I think they're right.
I think that we can
predict to some extent,
but we're still making mistakes.
And that's enough to not be
a useful tool to really drive
a car with just your thoughts.
AUDIENCE: Thank you so much.
MORAN CERF: Sure.
Last one.
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
So I'm asking a
couple of questions.
The first one is in terms of
identifying people's thoughts
and intentions.
Where the state of other--
so is it actually-- is
it mostly about trying
to identify what
areas of the brain
get activated when people think
some things or have some ideas?
Or on the other
side, you are looking
at something like the
feed that you sent to us,
we'd send to your cardio
muscles or whatever.
Is that the two main
things that are there,
or is there something much
more advanced than there, too?
MORAN CERF: So the
neuroscience of our work
has kind of two angles--
one very applicative,
one very theoretical.
So the application is we're
trying to be really, really
good in decoding thoughts
so we can teach you
how to control things
outside of general behavior.
So we want to help people
that smoke to stop smoking.
We want to help people who
cannot move their arms control
a robotic arm or a
wheelchair and move around.
This is the application.
And then we just try to
improve the accuracy.
If right now, we can predict
your choice 9 out of 10 times,
I want to get to 10 out of 10.
That's that.
The other angle is neuroscience.
The fact that we found
out how the brain coded
a thought in those electrical
chemical spikes is still crude.
Sometimes you heard that
it goes from [TAPPING]
to [RAPIDLY TAPPING].
But we don't know
exactly why is it
that speed and not that speed.
And presumably this carries
the most interesting part
of our life.
The brain doesn't
randomly spike.
Every spike means something.
So we now try to not
just be binary and say
Marilyn Monroe,
not Marilyn Monroe,
but actually why is it coding
Marilyn Monroe this way
and not that way.
What are the associations?
If Marilyn Monroe
reminds you of JFK,
will the cell that
coded Marilyn Monroe
fire for Kennedy as well?
If you fire for
Kennedy, will you
fire for Bobby Kennedy
and other Kennedys?
Or just for one?
How far is it?
So those are interesting
questions philosophically.
When in your life
did you acquire this?
Why did it pick this
cell and not that cell?
So the neuroscience is really
both interesting and in need
of people with technical skills.
AUDIENCE: Sure.
The second question was
how transferable is this
from one person to the other?
Because I'm assuming that the
way one person has an idea--
their knowledge base
about Marilyn Monroe
is entirely different from
how another person thinks
about the idea of
Marilyn Monroe.
So do you see this
being applied from--
you know, like say something's
standing between us on a lane,
or maybe 10 people--
maybe like 1,000 people
see a billboard in Times
Square, and then somebody
captures that data
to figure out just
what phased from yesterday
in terms of thoughts?
Or do you think this is not
transferable at all based
on the data that you've seen?
MORAN CERF: So high
level, it's very possible.
Low level, it's not.
So high but meaning
in all of our brains
that part of our brain that
codes people is the same.
So there's a part
that it comes to life
when you think Marilyn Monroe,
when I think Marilyn Monroe.
But within this
spot, there are many,
many millions or billions
of neurons and there
are organizationally chaotic.
Like your Marilyn Monroe cell
is here and mine is there.
They're all in the
same stadium, but you
might sit in section
one, and I'm section two.
And we didn't find any way
to kind of map one brain
to another in that
high level notion.
But there's a
Nobel Prize hanging
on the understanding of how
the brain actually decides
which cell to code this.
There's all kinds
of questions, like,
how do I structure
the fragment memories
and moving them over night?
And there's a lot of
theories why that is,
but no one actually knows
when the brain chose to put it
here and not there and why.
Now, the reason it's
really, really interesting
is I can map your brain and find
Marilyn Monroe, and the Eiffel
Tower, and your mom and
dad cells in your brain.
And I can find it in his brain.
And once we do that,
we can actually
override communication.
So if think about historically,
we evolved in a lot of ways
in the last decades.
But communication is
still the same way.
If you find a
Neanderthal right now,
he and you would speak the
same way-- vocal cords, mouth.
And we know it's a
pretty slow process.
I can think thoughts in about
600 thoughts per second--
per minute, sorry.
I'm going to check my
brain, but I can talk then
only at 150 words per minute.
I can do 300, but
you can do 150.
So we are very slow.
We think a lot faster
than our bandwidth
is to communicate them.
And we also receive
them a bit faster.
Clearly there is a barrier
here that if we overcome,
if I can just find the Marilyn
Monroe cell in your brain
and in my brain,
and when I think it,
I just zap your brain.
And you immediately see it, we
can start using high frequency
communication.
And that's pretty cool.
AUDIENCE: Thank you.
MORAN CERF: Sure.
Thank you, guys.
It was a pleasure.
[APPLAUSE]